The unwearied zeal with which, in recent times, endeavours have been made to examine the direction and intensity of the magnetic force of the earth, at all parts of its surface, is the more worthy of admiration, as it has been prompted by the pure love of science. Great as is the importance to navigation of the most complete attainable knowledge of the lines of declination, more than this is scarcely required for its purposes. Whilst science delights to render such useful services, her own requisitions have a wider scope, and make it necessary that equal efforts should be devoted to the examination of all the magnetic elements.

It has been customary to represent the results of magnetic observations by three systems of lines, usually termed Isogonic. Isoclinal, and Isodynamic lines. In course of time these lines undergo considerable alterations both in position and in figure, so that a drawing of them represents the phænomena correctly only for the epoch to which it corresponds. Halley's Chart of Declination for 1700 is very different from that of Barlow for 1833; and already Hansteen's Dip Chart for 1780 differs greatly from the present position of the Isoclinal lines. Doubtless, in course of time, similar alterations in the lines of intensity will be manifested; but observations of this nature are altogether too recent to furnish such indications at present.

In all these maps there exist spaces either blank, or in which the lines are but indifferently supported by observation. The inaccessibility of parts of the earth's surface renders perfection in this respect impossible; but a rapid progress towards it may be confidently hoped for.

Viewed from the higher grounds of science even a complete representation of the phænomena after this manner is not itself the final object sought. It is rather analogous to what the astronomer has accomplished, when, for example, he has observed the apparent path of a comet in the heavens. Until the complicated phænomena have been brought in subjection to a common principle, we have only building-stones, not an edifice.

The astronomer, after the comet has disappeared from his view, begins his chief employment, and resting on the laws of gravitation, calculates from the observations the elements of its true path, and is thus enabled to predict its future course. And in like manner the magnetician proposes to himself as the object of his research, as far as the different and in some respects less favourable circumstances permit,—the study of the fundamental causes which produce the phænomena, their magnitude and their mode of operation,—the subjection of the observations, as far as they extend, to those elementary principles,—and the anticipation, with some approximation at least, of their effects, in those regions where observation has not yet penetrated. It is at least well to keep in view this higher object, and to endeavour to prepare the way for it, even though the great imperfection of the data may render its attainment impossible at present.

It is not my purpose here to notice the earlier fruitless attempts to explain the enigma of these phænomena by hypotheses having no physical foundation. A physical foundation can only be allowed to such attempts as have considered the earth as a real magnet, and have employed in the calculation only the demonstrated mode of action of a magnet operating at a distance. All attempts of this nature hithert omade have this in common;—that instead of first examining what the conditions, whether simple or complex, of this great magnet must be to satisfy the phænomena, certain determinate and simple conditions were presupposed, and the subject of inquiry has been the accordance or non-accordance of the phænomena with these presupposed conditions. We see here a repetition of what has often occurred in the early history of astronomy and of other sciences.

The simplest hypothesis of this kind is that which supposes a very small magnet in the centre of the earth; or rather (as it is not likely that any one ever believed in the actual existence of such a magnet) supposes magnetism to be so distributed in the earth, that its collective action at and beyond the surface is equivalent to the action of an imaginary infinitely small magnet; much as gravitation towards a homogeneous sphere is equivalent to the attraction of a sphere of equal mass condensed in its central point. In the supposed case, the magnetic poles are the two points where the prolonged axis of the little central magnet intersects the earth's surface; where the magnetic needle is vertical and the intensity is also greatest. In the great circle midway between these two poles called the magnetic equator, the dip is 
=
0
{\displaystyle =0} and the intensity is half as gi-eat as at the poles; between the magnetic equator and either pole, both the dip and the intensity depend on the distance from the said equator (which distance is termed the magnetic latitude) in such manner, that the tangent of the dip is equal to twice the tangent of the magnetic latitude. Lastly, the direction of the horizontal needle must everywhere coincide with the direction of a great circle drawn through the northern magnetic pole.

There is in nature only a rude approximation to all these necessary consequences of the above hypothesis. In reality the line of no dip is not a great circle, but a line of double flexure; equal intensities do not correspond to equal dips; the directions of the horizontal needle are far from all converging to one point; and so on. A very slight consideration is sufficient therefore to show the inadmissibility of this hypothesis.

One of the above propositions is however still employed as an approximation in deducing the line of no dip from observations of dips of small amount made at some little distance from it.

About eighty years ago, Tobias Mayer used a similar hypothesis, but with this modification; that instead of supposing the infinitely small magnet at the centre of the earth, he placed it at about the seventh part of the earth's radius from the centre; at the same time (probably in order to avoid greater complication in the calculations) he retained the wholly arbitrary supposition, of the plane perpendicular to the axis of the magnet passing through the centre of the earth. In this manner, on a comparison of the observed variations and dips, at a very small number of places it is true, he found them agree very well with his calculation. A more extended comparison would have shown that this hypothesis did not afford a much better representation than the first-mentioned one, of the whole phænomena of the dip and declination. No observations of the intensity had been at that time made, at least as far as we know.

Hansteen went a step further, by the endeavour to represent the phænomena on the hypothesis of two infinitely small eccentric magnets of unequal strength. The decisive test of an hypothesis must always be the comparison of its results with those of experiment. Hansteen compared his with observations at forty-eight different places, amongst which however there were only twelve at which the intensity had been determined, and only six complete in the three elements. In these comparisons we find in the dip differences of 13° between calculation and observation[1].

If these differences are greater than are admissible in a satisfactory theory, one cannot avoid drawing the conclusion, that the magnetic conditions of the earth are not such as to admit of representation by means of a concentration in either one or two infinitely small magnets. It is not denied that with a greater number of such fictitious magnets, a sufficient agreement might be ultimately attainable; but how far such a mode of solving the problem might be advisable is quite a different question. The calculations are extremely laborious even with two magnets; with an increased number they would probably present insuperable difficulties. It will be best to abandon entirely this mode of proceeding, which reminds one involuntarily of the attempts to explain the planetary motions by continued accumulation of epicycles.

In the present treatise it is my purpose to develope the general theory of terrestrial magnetism independently of all particular hypotheses as to the distribution of the magnetic fluids in the body of the earth; and to communicate the results which I have obtained from the first application of the method. Imperfect as these results must be, they give an idea of what may be hoped for in future, when trustworthy and complete observations from all parts of the earth shall be obtained, and employed in renewed and more refined attempts.

